# What exactly is React?

I've always been quite annoyed at technical book's which include a summary on what the technology is. Yet here we are and I know that you know what React is. However, there is merit in explaining what React is, since we'll both be on the same page we'll have an easier time going through the process of learning how to use React.

React is a JavaScript library. It is less like Angular and Ember and more like jQuery. React is used to build user interfaces. Right, let's move on. 

## Why learn React?

I also don't like this section in technical books, alas we are here. You're time is precious. You are a developer that is insistent on using tools which increase your productivity yet don't baffle you with hidden 'magic'. You like to want to develop web applications with rich interactivity and responsiveness yet you may be unsure of how to go about this. Should you pick up Angular? What about Ember? Now those are very personal questions and it is simply up to you to decide. I cannot declare, "use React all the time" as that is just poor advice and not to mention atrociously bias. No, instead I can show you what React is, teach you how to use it and then pull it all together through building a moderately sized example application. The best part is that since React is not a framework it is very quick and easy to digest. We will learn most of the React API and then put it into practice in less than 30 pages.

# Let's get started

Right now we could go over some of the core features of React, like the virtual DOM and the diff process, but I think it's better if we simply build something with React. In this short lesson we are going to import the React library into an HTML file. We are then going to have React render 'Hello, World' onto the HTML body. Not the most exciting of lessons but necessary none the less!

Firstly we need an HTML page with the React library loaded via a CDN.

index.html
```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
  <title>Lesson 1</title>
  <script type="text/javascript" src="facebook"></script>
</head>
<body>

</body>
</html>
```

Get that loaded up into your browser. I prefer changing directory (in a terminal) into the project and running: `$ python -m SimpleHTTPServer`. This boots up a process which will serve the index file on localhost port 8000.

Visit the page via a web browser and you should see nothing. Let's use React to render `Hello, World` on to the body.

Create a new `script.js` file in the same directory and type the following.

script.js
```
var helloWorldElement = React.DOM.h1(null, "Hello, World");

React.render(helloWorldElement, document.body);
```
Include the script in your HTML page (after the React library) and reload the browser. Hello, World should now display. This is hardly ground breaking and you may be wondering, why use React for this, writing HTML could have gained the same result. Yes, it easily could have. This is just a simple example to get the learning started.

In the first line we have told React to create an h1 with an inner text of Hello, World. The first argument is for options on the new DOM element (class, id, data attributes etc). We don't need any so it is null. The second line tells React to render the helloWorldElement into the body of the HTML document.

This is a contrived example. Let's actually use React to add a little bit of interactivity. Delete everything in script.js and write the following.

script.js
```
var App = React.createClass({

  getInitialState: function() {
    return {
      message: "Hello, World"
    }
  },

  render: function() {
    return (
      React.DOM.div(null, [
        React.DOM.h1(null, this.state.message),
        React.DOM.input({ onChange: this.inputDidChange })
      ]);
    )
  }
});

React.render(App, document.body);
```

Before reloading the browser let's figure out what this code does. Firstly, a the React function, `createClass` is called, passed some arguments and assigned to the `App` variable. The createClass function returns a *component*. In React, a component is thought of like any other HTML element but since we are creating it, we get the chance to imbue it with extra functionality via JavaScript. That's the essence of React; build components. 

Let's analyse code. The function `createClass`, has been given two arguments. `getInitialState` is given a function which returns an object. The object has a single value, `message` which holds the value Hello, World. The function `getInitialState` is called on the component when it is loaded into the DOM for the first time.

The next argument, `render` is again assigned a function. This function returns a single React div which contains an h1 and an input. The inner HTML of the h1 is `this.state.message`. We are accessing the component's state object and retrieving the value of message. Remember the first time this component loads into the page it will be Hello, World. The input element is given an options object with one key/value, `onChange` which holds a value `this.inputDidChange`. `this` is the component and `inputDidChange` is a function on the component. We have NOT created this function yet, we will shortly. For now we can guess that this component, when rendered (see last line) will output a div with an h1 (which contains the text, "Hello, World") and an input. View the page in a browser and that's exactly what we get. Let's finish the component by writing the inputDidChange function. All we need to do is add the function to the `createClass` arguments.

script.js
```
var App = React.createClass({

  inputDidChange: function(event) {
    this.setState({
      message: event.target.value
    });
  },

  getInitialState: function() {
    return {
      message: "Hello, World"
    }
  },

  render: function() {
    return (
      React.DOM.div(null, [
        React.DOM.h1(null, this.state.message),
        React.DOM.input({ onChange: this.inputDidChange })
      ]);
    )
  }
});

React.render(App, document.body);
```
